Hello and welcome back to the course on Machine Learning.
Today we're going to talk about a specific aspect of the
k-means algorithm which is the random initialization trap.
So let's have a look at this phenomenon
and see what it's all about.
So, random initialization trap.
So here we've got a scatter plot again with two variables,
so we've got the X and Y coordinates.
And in this case,
let's say we're going to choose a three clusters.
So right away you can kind of tell
which is the final result,
what is the final result going to look like
if we choose three clusters.
It does look like you can pretty easily spot them here.
But let's nevertheless perform this operation,
this algorithm, and if we initialize
our centroids like this, then what we'll get is,
because we're already kind of can tell that probably,
that's a cluster, that's a cluster, and that's a cluster,
so just to make the algorithm a bit faster
so we don't have to do too many easy steps and iterations,
we're gonna select our centroids like this,
and, right away, if we perform the algorithm,
we'll get to these clusters.
And next is, even if we move around the centroids,
so we find the centroids of each of these clusters,
nothing is going to change.
So you can, in your own time, you can perform the steps
that we learned about in the previous tutorial,
and see that nothing will indeed change because of the way
we selected the centroids.
This is already the final result.
So those are going to be the clusters
that we're going to end up with.
So that's kind of the end results of the k-means algorithm.
Because we selected the clusters,
the centroids in the places where we did.
Now the question is what if we select the centroids
in different locations.
Will we be able to change the result?
Will the result be different?
And, of course, an algorithm has to be
what we want from this algorithm is for it to just
a deterministic result because we can select the centroids
at random and therefore we don't want that selection of
centroids to affect how the cluster is going to happen.
But let's have a look and see what happens.
So what will happen if we had a bad random initialization?
So bad is like a term we're going to use loosely for now,
but you'll see why we're using
bad random initialization just now.
So again we're going to go through these steps
that we discussed in the previous tutorial.
We're going to choose the number of clusters
which is three, all selected at random.
Three points which will be our centroids.
We'll assign each data point to the closest centroid,
that'll form k clusters.
We'll compute and place a new centroid for each cluster,
thinking in terms of the center of mass
or center of gravity.
And, so far, we will reassign each data point
to the new closest centroid.
If any reassignment took place, we will return to step four.
Otherwise, we'll go to the end
because the model has converged.
So these are the steps we discussed previously.
Let's have a look at them in action.
Alright, so three clusters, and this time,
instead of selecting a centroids here, here and here,
what we're going to do is
we're going to select them differently.
We're going to select the centroids like this.
So we'll put one centroid here on this side,
one centroid here, and one centroid here.
So let's have a look what happens now.
If we draw a line, so this time we have three clusters,
three centroids, but the principle is kind of the same.
We still have a point which is equidistant
from all three of them.
So this point over here is the same distance from all three.
And then this line is equidistant from these two.
This line is equidistant from these two.
Again this is not part of the algorithm.
As part of the algorithm,
you will just take each individual point.
You'll look at this point and you would see which
centroid is the closest, so this time it's green.
You'd color it green.
This one you check again, you'd color it green,
this one you check again, you'd color it green.
And so on.
Then this one is the closest to red, you'd color it red.
But just to make things easier for ourselves,
we're going to use this little hack.
We're going to use these lines to say
anything in this part of the chart is going to be closest
to red just because these are equidistant lines,
anything in this part of the chart is going to be green.
Anything in this part of the chart is going to be blue.
It'll just save us time.
So based on this method, we can tell right away that
this is the red cluster for now, this is the blue,
this is the green.
So now we're going to, we've assigned each data point
to the closest centroid, that's great.
Now we're going to move on to step four.
And we're going to move these clusters.
So we're going to recalculate, compute and place
the new centroids for each cluster.
So there we can see that that is probably the center of mass
for the reds, uh points, that's the one for blue points,
that's the one for green points.
So we move our centroids to the new locations.
And now we're going to perform a step five.
We're going to reassign each data point
to the new closest centroid.
So again we're going to use that quick hack with the lines.
Let's see how the lines will look like this time.
There's our new equidistant point,
and these are the equidistant lines.
So this time you can see that nothing will change.
The red points are all already in the red.
Corner, blue points are in the blue corner.
And green points are in the green corner.
So nothing is going to change.
There will be no reassignment,
so we don't go to step four.
We instead go to finalizing the algorithm
because it has converged.
So there we go.
That is our model, it is ready.
And as a result, we have these three clusters.
Now these three clusters are different
to what we saw at the start.
So let's have a look.
This is what we saw at the start.
We're going to call them the true three clusters,
because you can tell just from the chart,
you can tell that these points would
most likely to form a cluster,
these would form a cluster and these would form a cluster.
Just by looking at it, you can intuitively tell
that that is the case.
This is what we got in the first,
at the start of this tutorial.
And this is what we got now.
So you can see that the three clusters are different.
And therefore what we have is a situation or a phenomenon
where the selection of the centroids
at the very start of the algorithm can potentially dictate
the outcome of the algorithm.
And that's not a good thing because the centroids
are selected at random.
So how do you combat this? How do you battle this?
Well the answer is actually not as straightforward.
There is a addition or a modification to the k-means
algorithm, that allows you to correctly select the centroids
and the solution here is the k-means plus plus algorithm.
Now at the same time, I wanted to mention that we're not
actually going to delve deeply into the k-means plus plus
algorithm and how it's structured.
You can definitely read up more about it on Wikipedia
or other sources.
It is quite a involved approach
in how that selection occurs, but the good news is that
all this happens in the background.
So the k-means plus plus happens either in R or Python
or whatever tool you're using.
You don't need to actually implement it.
So it's just a good idea to be aware of this issue.
That there's a true cluster result that you're after.
And they can be some false or some non-desirable
clustering results, clustering outcomes of the k-mean
clustering algorithm.
It's good to be aware of that issue and it's also good
to know that the tools that you use will be,
or make sure that the tools you're using,
are going to be implementing that specific selection of the
random centroids at the very start so that you get the
good result.
So definitely if you are more interested to learn more
about the k-means plus plus algorithm,
definitely read up about it.
But otherwise it's not something that
you really have to worry about.
It's just something that you need to keep in mind
and make sure, or be confident that the tools you're using
are bypassing this initialization trap.
So hopefully you enjoyed today's tutorial,
and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then, enjoy Machine Learning.